---
layout: default
title: ID20200119
parent: Academic Note
---

<script type="text/javascript" id="MathJax-script" async
   src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-mml-chtml.js">
MathJax = {
  chtml: {mathmlSpacing: true}
};
 </script>

## Giant X-ray Bubbles in the Milky Way halo

### Main takeaway

A team of scientists from German, Russia and Italy report the discovery of two giant X-ray bubbles that extend approximately 14 kpc above and below the Galactic center with the X-ray telescope eROSITA aboard the Spektr-RG mission. The bubbles with sharp boundaries are not a remnant of a local supernova but part of a vast Galaxy-scale structure which could be powered by **star-formation** or **supermassive black hole activities** in the past. 

### Details

* The giant X-ray bubble (eROSITA bubble) in the north of Galactic plane has been detected as part of the **North Polar Spur** and **Loop I** discovered in the early days of [X-ray](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1995A%26A...294L..25E/abstract) and [radio](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1971A%26A....14..359B/abstract) astronomy. 
* A **new** structure below the Galactic plane is found for this time with the similar shape and scale to the structure seen in the north owing to the higher sensitivity and harder energy response of eROSITA.
* The [previous study](https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.03813) of absorption in X-ray and radio bands places a lower limit of 300 pc on the distance to the structure, which **rules out a nearby supernova remnant**.
* eROSITA bubbles show remarkable morphological similarity with [**Fermi bubble**](https://arxiv.org/abs/1005.5480), kpc scale bubbles above and below the Galactic center with hard, non-thermal spectrum at energies more than 1 GeV, which is discovered by Fermi-LAT in 2010. Their emission is probably due to **inverse Compton scattering** of cosmic-ray electrons on the cosmic microwave background and other radiation fields.
* The 0.6-1 keV map (Fig. 3) shows that each bubble is close to spherical with a radius of about 6-7 kpc, while the Fermi bubbles are roughly elliptical.
* One-dimensional surface-brightness profiles along the Galactic longitude (Fig. 2) are qualitatively consistent with the projection of a **2 kpc thick spherical shell** with an outer diameter of 14 kpc.
* The **total thermal energy** of the eROSITA bubbles is almost 10 times larger than that of the Fermi bubbles, \\(10^{56}\\) erg and \\(10^{55}\\) erg respectively.
* **AGN feedback** (the typical luminosity of Syfert-like activity is \\(10^{41}\\) erg) & **stellar feedback** (the typical kinetic energy of type II supernova ejecta is \\(10^{51}\\) erg)
* The temperature increases from about 0.2 keV outside the bubbles to around 0.3 keV inside, which indicates the presence of a **feedback mechanism in quiescent galaxies**, 
* The hot plasma outside the bubbles is shock-heated during the collapse of the **dark-matter halo**. 
* The cooling time of the hot plasma in the halo is comparable to the **Hubble time**, so the process of **growing a galaxy** is assumed to be steady (apart from mergers) and slow. 

### Citation

[Detection of large-scale X-ray bubbles in the Milky Way halo](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2012.05840.pdf)

### Related Articles

Paper Summary: [The Milky Way’s Double Bubble](https://astrobites.org/2020/12/19/xray-fermi-bubbles/)

Review: [Large-Scale Features of the Radio Sky and a Model for Loop I](https://inspirehep.net/files/7c7717597a3315954ba48e66f125c67c)

Journal: [The Spectrum and Morphology of the Fermi Bubbles](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014ApJ...793...64A/abstract)
